---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on Vim"
date:   2020-10-18 15:04:14 -0500
categories: vim
---
[WIP]

When thinking of vim, the people who often come to mind are those Arch Linux i3 developers 
who probably spend more time tinkering with their configuration files than actually coding. 
It might seem odd, then, as a MacOS, IntelliJ developer that I love vim so much.

# Forget CLI vim
Forget CLI vim. It's fast and light-weight, but computers are powerful. It's highly configurable, 
but modern IDEs are preconfigured and are often more powerful. 

But.

When I am advocating for vim, I am not advocating for CLI, I am advocating for the keybinds it has.
This might seem obscure. Why would anyone learn a whole new set of keybinds to edit a file when 
they can just use the ones they know? Perhaps it would lead to a 5% increase in productivity after
it has been learned, but that's at least two weeks waisted.

The truth is, I believed the same way, until I started to get annoyed.

# Server Administration

When SSHing into a host, people are normally forced into three situations: 
- vi (vim)
- nano
- sftp

If you've ever used SFTP to edit a large file, or a sequence of several small files, you probably
know the pain that it takes. Many people, will then revert to nano, but I don't know anyone who would
say their speed in nano is comparable to their speed if they were to edit files natively on their
desktop.

Fortunately, vi (which is essentially vim) will be just as fast as editing the file natively, assuming
your latency isn't absolute trash, and you also know bindings. I can't express how much time this has
saved me, but just the thought of not wanting to cry when editing files remotely was a big selling point 
for me.

# IDEs

When coding locally, an IDE is almost always the best option as it is powerful. Fortunantely pretty 
much every IDE/editor has vim support. IntelliJ has `IdeaVim` and Sublime Text has a slew of their
own vim implementations.

# Multiple Environments

One of the other big selling points of vim is that the keys you type to do an action will be the same
across environments. For example, the key to join two lines in IntelliJ versus Sublime Text is probably
different. When using each tool on a different operating system, the keybind is probably different.
MacOS CMD-based keybinds are almost always different than the Windows ctrl-based keybinds. vim
offers a singular group of keybinds my muscle can map to. If I suddenly need to switch environments,
I will be just as fast as if I didn't need to. This, I believe, is the biggest selling point of vim.

