---
layout: post
title: "Unproductive or Lonely"
---


**Could my lack of productivity be tied to loneliness?** This is a significant question I'm posing to myself. Why
exactly do I habitually check iMessage, Snapchat, or my emails? Is it genuinely because I believe there will be a
beneficial outcome, or is it more about loneliness? Is it because I crave the sense of being cared for, or feeling
important when I receive an email?

Perhaps I need to focus more on cultivating my own happiness independently. Therapists, after all, don't advocate for
constant dependence on them as it breeds an unhealthy relationship, anchored in the need to incessantly rely on someone
else. Following that same line of thought, I believe it's unhealthy to require constant interactions with others for
happiness. While yes, interactions with others can indeed make us happy, needing them incessantly for our joy is an
unhealthy dependency.

For this month, my objective is to detach from Instagram by deleting it. However, I've come to realize this is quite
challenging. At times, I find it _necessary_ to use it to keep in touch with people. For example, there are many distant
friends that I only communicate with via Instagram. Yet, I consider this a more intentional use. Checking Instagram once
every few hours seems sensible, but compulsively refreshing the feed is unhealthy. We should regain control over
our lives, rather than getting caught up in endless asynchronous conversations, leading us into a constant craving for
affection.

My goal is to restrict social media checks to a couple of times a week. If someone truly needs to connect with me, a
phone call should suffice. The aim here is to maintain balance and not let the relentless pull of social media dominate
my time and emotions.
